so
without further Ado we're going to
keep talking about State expiration
today and  I think  Garen dropped a
today and I think Garen dropped a
bit of a bomb  a couple of days ago so
bit of a bomb a couple of days ago so
I think we're gonna start with that and
again if you can give us a quick
overview of some of the suggested
changes
yeah sure so up until this point
the current Legacy expiration
proposal has had this thing called a
rent balance so essentially what you
would do is that  whenever you you
would do is that whenever you you
know create an entry or want to do a
rent bump you would put xlm into this
rent balance and then every Ledger a
variable amount of a fee called the rent
fee would be removed from this rent
balance and the rent feed could either
decrease or increase based on the size
of the bucket list and network usage
so the reasoning behind this initially
was that we want to provide some sort of
market equilibrium that as The Bucket
List gets larger and as the price of
writing to the bucket list increases we
also have increased pressure to evict
and expire entries out of the bucket
list and so the thinking with this kind
of variable rent fee is that as the
Buckle list grows you the rent fee also
grows and so that you deduct rent
balance more aggressively and so more
entries will fall to zero or negative
rent balances and then be expired more
frequently so that's kind of the
original thinking as to why we had this
variable rent balance and this variable
rent fee now the issue with that is
there's two primary issues the first is
just the user experience story so with
run balance because the rent fee that's
deducted is variable from ledger to
Ledger you can estimate how many ledgers
you think your entry will be live on the
network but you can't know for certain
so for instance say if you initially
paid for 100 ledgers of rent
but you know there are a bunch of
merges so the bucket list size decreased
a lot then your entry could live much
longer conversely if you paid for say 10
years of rent your entry might only
lasts one year if the network explodes
in popularity and the Buckle of size
increases and so it's kind of weird user
interface where the users expect an
entry's lifetime to be measured in
ledgers but really you have like this
rent balance and like this variable
thing you really can't control it and so
that was issue number one is that it was
difficult for users to understand and it
didn't have a great user Story the
second issue is that of Downstream
systems and so because the rent fee is
variable from ledger to Ledger you don't
know when or you can't predict what the
Run fee will be and so you cannot
predict an entry's rent balance now in
Stellar core we have like this bucket
list data structure which is like you
know specially designed with this
multiple levels and like this log
scripted merge tree approach and we've
designed  the rent balance  system
designed the rent balance system
to work very well with the bucket list
such that  on bucket list and on
such that on bucket list and on
bucket list DB you always know exactly
how much rent balance your entry has and
we can do this efficiently without
iterating through every entry and then
you know decrementing its rent balance
by the current letters rent fee  we
by the current letters rent fee we
can like you know get around it using
some optimizations of the bucket list
structure now the issue for Downstream
systems is that Downstream systems don't
have a copy of the bucket list  you
have a copy of the bucket list you
know they're running captive core but
the way that a captive Quorum core is
currently designed it's too expensive to
query a captive core directly and so
that means that in order for these
Downstream systems  primarily Horizon
Downstream systems primarily Horizon
and sort of on RPC nodes in order for
them to have accurate rent balance
information what they would need is to
essentially either maintain their own
version of The Bucket List and apply
rent via like a copy of the bucket list
or do some like very inefficient
operations
with like SQL where you like
essentially cache  some amount of rent
essentially cache some amount of rent
fees and then lazily apply them in the
background or something like that but in
either case it's  it's a lot of work
either case it's it's a lot of work
for Downstream systems a lot of disk i o
and things like that so those are these
are the two main drawbacks and so when
thinking about this issue we thought
from our first principles okay do we
need this variable rent fee do we need a
rent balance or can we use a definitive
expiration Ledger and so that's kind of
what today's conversation about is rent
balance versus expiration Ledger now how
the expiration ledger works is instead
of having The Ledger entry store a rent
balance field that is periodically
deducted from instead all it stores is a
single entry which is expiration Ledger
it's very simple essentially before the
expiration Ledger the entry is live and
accessible after the expiration Ledger
the entry has run out of rent and is not
accessible and then once the entry is
passed this expiration Ledger it can be
expired which is when it's deleted from
The Bucket List and then if it's a
temporary entry it could be permanently
deleted or if it's a restorable entry
it's deleted and then stay sent to a
state restoration node or something like
that
now the advantages to the expiration
Ledger approach are that it's
significantly easier for Downstream
systems because they don't have to
periodically update entries with rent
balance information  The Meta that's
balance information The Meta that's
initially emitted whenever an entry is
created or an entry receives a rent bump
we'll tell Downstream systems exactly
when an entry should expire and so it's
pretty straightforward from the
implementation standpoint it also makes
a lot more sense for users who expect
that a lifetime is measured in kind of
Ledger a discrete and predictable values
now the drawback to this is that we
can't have this Dynamic eviction
pressure feature that we have in rent
balance so how the expiration Ledger
implementation will work with respect to
fees is what we would do is take
whatever the current market rent fee
rate is based on the size of The
Blacklist and then lock that right in
and charge that rate for the entire
lifetime of the object or of the entry
so for instance say you are creating a
new entry that has one year's worth of
rent you would be charged one year's
worth of rent at the current rent fee
now the issue with this is suppose that
within that year The Bucket List size
increases significantly essentially what
you would be doing is because you locked
in that rage when the size was small
you'd be paying an artificially low rate
compared to other entries that are being
added onto the network later
and so you have this weird system where
these entries can be kind of
grandfathered in so to speak such that
they pay  low fees because it's gotten
they pay low fees because it's gotten
at the ground level when the network is
low
and so with rent balances you don't have
this grandfather thing because even if
you create an entry on Day Zero answer
up on launch day when the buck list was
at you know theoretical smallest size
because  every entry is subject to the
because every entry is subject to the
same variable rent fee no matter when
they were created the old entries and
new entries are charged the same rate
however because you have to essentially
lock in the rate on creation time around
bump time with an expiration Ledger
approach that's not possible
and so I think what we want to think
about if we want to make expiration
letters work because I think the two
benefits to Downstream systems and to
the user experience are very very
significant benefits and so we should
think about expiration Ledges pretty
seriously
I think that we need to make sure I
think the thing we want to prevent most
are kind of two scenarios first where
you have a system where users or there's
smart Contracting can essentially
provide a storage interface for cheaper
than the protocol can if you can imagine
say on day Zero when the bucket list is
small someone spins up a smart contract
that has public functions that exactly
mirror the storage functions of that the
protocol exposes so you have like you
know get
you know create just the exact same
interface but instead of calling it
directly through the sorbon SDK you
would just make a call to a Smart
contract for your storage needs and so
what this storage contract could do is
it could just you know buy up say the
maximum amount of Ledger entries
possible
on day Zero with say like 100 years
of rent or some very large value and
essentially permanently lock in those
entries for 100 years at the lowest
possible rent fee and then say two or
three years down the line you know if
the Stellar Network explodes and huge
the rent fee will be significantly
higher and so what this contract can do
is essentially auction off this rent
space at a artificially low rate and so
you can essentially use a middleman
contract to get cheaper storage than you
could if you actually went to the
protocol directly and so this is really
bad from a Network Health perspective
because essentially every storage call
now has to pass this middleman and so
you have lots of additional traffic lots
of additional
overhead for serving storage just
because essentially you have a bug and
exploitability in the way that you
charge rent
and so I think to prevent against that
specific exploit where you have like
these  these storage contract
these these storage contract
interfaces what you would need is some
sort of upper bound on the amount of
Ledger or the lifetime of an entry at
any given point essentially the thinking
being that you know
if you allow arbitrarily large amounts
of rent purchases then you could say
lock in an entry for 100 years which is
far too long because the price will
probably significantly increase in that
lifetime but if you have a maximum
lifetime of say six months it's unlikely
that a storage contract interface could
be profitable with only six months
difference between the initial rent fee
paid and then the rent you they'd be
providing their users and so I think the
plan is if we do expiration ledgers is
to have a network parameter which is the
maximum rent or the maximum lifetime of
a given entry on The Ledger and so this
could be something like six months or
one year and this would be a network
parameter and so what we can do is you
want this value to be as large as
possible from a user perspective just so
you can provide the most flexibility and
usability but you want to be small
enough such that you don't have these
rent related exploits and so that would
be a number that we can change by a
network vote just so that we can
essentially tune this value up or down
as we see exploits happening on the
network or as we see that no exploits
are happening on the network
in addition to this issue we also
kind of like the middleman storage
contract we also want to make sure that
we're not allowing a bunch of spam
entries to lock in very low rates take
up space on the network and essentially
up the price for everyone else that's
doing legitimate work that's not spam
and so you can imagine that on Day Zero
when the you know buckless has a small
you have a bunch of airdrops that take
whatever the maximum lifetime is say six
months a year or whatever and then
essentially just mint spam airdrop
tokens and tell the bucket list size
increases such that's no longer
profitable
now the issue with this is that they can
essentially even though you know each
additional spam token they  put on the
additional spam token they put on the
network raises the rent fees slightly
for the next spam token they can still
do this very fast and very quickly take
up the cheapest rent options with all of
this spam and unlike an event balance
approach even though the spam has caused
the rent fees to be high for everyone
else because the spam did it first they
are not subject to those higher fees and
you can't evict them which means you can
have like this  essentially these
have like this essentially these
events where if for whatever reason the
bucket list size decreases in the rent
fee decreases rapidly you can have all
these spam tokens kind of come in and
fill the Gap in very quickly get the
network up to that you know high rent
fee rate again at the cost of all of
these spam entries taking up more time
than they probably should
and so I think that's probably where I
want to get the conversation  started
want to get the conversation started
and open up the floor of questions but
those  are the biggest pros and cons
those are the biggest pros and cons
of each the pros of rent balance being
you know this eviction pressure and
defining these exploits natively without
like the need for like a maximum rent
balance or something like that the con
being Downstream systems and usability
Garand  there was a question  around
Garand there was a question around
the downstream systems can you just
quickly outline the the difference or
specifically with exploration Ledger
what would be the downstream  systems
what would be the downstream systems
kind of like expectations yeah so I
think the  the the issue with the
think the the the issue with the
rent balance versus expiration Ledger is
just that  an expiration letter we can
just that an expiration letter we can
put in meta so that the downstream
systems can be directly told what the
expiration Ledger is but there's no way
to emit meta for the variable rent
balance bombs just because they're too
frequent so for instance with expiration
Ledger just because it's set a single
time on creation or whenever an entry
has its  is expiration or its
has its is expiration or its
lifetime extended what you can do is
just emit meta that says okay this key
has this lifetime and then they start in
a SQL database and then whenever you
access that entry you can just spit out
the lifetime easy and so you can contain
all that information in meta with rent
balance the issue is the initial rep
balance is in the meta sure so say like
this has a starting value of a thousand
xlm but the issue is every Ledger has a
variable amount that's deducted from
that thousand xlm and because every
single Ledger or every single Ledger
entry is subject to this variable rent
every single Ledger closed what we'd
have to do is if to contain this
information in meta literally submit a
meta entry for every single entry on The
Ledger periodically with the updated
rent information and that's just not
possible and so essentially the
downstream systems would have to manage
this rent balance themselves and we
could probably emit the variable rent
fee as meta every Ledger close but then
it would be the responsibility of the
downstream systems to implement
essentially the rent balance bookkeeping
themselves if that makes sense
foreign
it does sound for the most part like
like a win-win so I definitely want to
un  probably focus on like what are
un probably focus on like what are
the pros
of
of the current Red Diamond system
compared to exploration Ledger
yes I think the it comes to to eviction
pressure and kind of
not being exploitable or being
more game proof and so that's the
primary issue with locking in a
essentially a rent fee at creation time
is that you open up these
vulnerabilities for the kind of like a
contract storage middleman and for a
long life spam entries that increase
rent fees for everyone else and so those
are the two kind of I think exploits
that we want to prevent happening
and so if we can find essentially a
suitable  limitations on the
suitable limitations on the
expiration Ledger like one limitation
being not allowing arbitrarily large
lifetimes to defeat those two exploits
then I think it would be a good a good
decision there's also a couple of other
drawbacks I think these are all solvable
problems but just something to think
about is that there's certain issues
like because you're locking in an
expiration Ledger
there are questions about what to do
whenever you resize an entry so for
instance say you create an entry that's
only one byte large and say okay I want
it to have an expiration Ledger 10 years
from now and so you pay  the rent fee
from now and so you pay the rent fee
for 10 years but  for only one byte
for 10 years but for only one byte
and then two ledgers later you say oh
this entry is now 100 kilobytes
then you essentially need to
reconcile okay what do we do in this
situation do we either a shorten the
lifetime because the rent fee is now
higher because it's  you know a larger
higher because it's you know a larger
entry size
just for reference the rent fee is
charged per byte and so you need to pay
more rent in order to have the same
expiration Ledger you did before and so
my current thinking for that particular
Edge case is that the expiration Ledger
should never decrease for instance a
write or an update or changing the size
of an entry should never decrease its
lifetime it should only match or
increase the lifetime which means that
if you have an entry that has say 10
years worth of
or that has an expiration Ledger 10
years in the future if you resize that
entry then you what you need to do is
you need to pay for essentially the
difference so you'd have to pay in this
example if you had a one byte entry and
now it's a you know 10 byte entry you'd
have to pay for 10 bytes or for the nine
additional bytes
whenever you do that update and so I
think  there are like issues like that
think there are like issues like that
and then the two exploit
exploitability cases that rent balance
solves really  elegantly because rent
solves really elegantly because rent
balance you you know  it's charged
balance you you know it's charged
every Ledger and so if you resize it
then they'll the you know new
additional fees will just be picked up
on the next Ledger and so it's handled
automatically and then these exploits
are not possible just because
your rent for your paying is always
up to date and so you can never game the
system by locking in a rent fee early
and then using it later when the rent
fee is more expensive
is there anyone on stage or in the
audience that want to speak in favor of
rent balances
okay
so yeah I just I just want to comment
on this from a from a product
perspective I definitely think that this
is this is a big win because  the user
is this is a big win because the user
experience of the previous  proposal
experience of the previous proposal
red balances  is definitely kind of
red balances is definitely kind of
like requires a bit of a complex mental
model of what rent actually means
because when people you know pay rent
they are used to kind of like locking a
specific grade for a specific given of
time a specific given amount of time so
I do think that this new proposal kind
of like sits better with like a mental
model of of what rent actually is even
though we're not using the word rent
here
one question that I also asked on
Discord
is around a the question of
temporary entries and to the question of
like Auto bumps and what is what are the
implications for these
yeah so I think my current thinking is
that we should still have Auto bumps
but the auto bump should be optional
and optional well let me explain what
I mean by optional and so I think  in
I mean by optional and so I think in
this system we still want an auto bump
system  such that you know frequently
system such that you know frequently
used entries
and shared entries such as contract
instances and  contract code wasm are
instances and contract code wasm are
paid for and so that was envisioning is
that before we were like bumping by some
you know amount of xlm now because we
have this expiration Ledger interface we
would just  Bump by some modest amount
would just Bump by some modest amount
like 10 ledgers per access
automatically and some of that would
look like is that you would pay at the
current market rate
whatever the current rent fee is for
the extension and so even if the entries
say had like three years worth of rent
that was paid for two years ago so it
was very cheap whenever you access it
you would still need to pay for the
additional 10 ledgers at the current
market rate
and so that's for automatic bumps I
think
what we should do for auto bumps is
especially for temporary entries there
were use cases where other bumps are
useful and use cases where Auto bumps
are not and so I think when creating an
entry what you should do is on the
initial item creation you can set a flag
and that flag is either Auto bumps true
false and so
what this allows you to do is that
the original developer when you're
creating the entry can choose if this
entry is something that should be bumped
or something that is like you know
short-lived so it should expire and then
whenever you access that entry that
flag is stored in The Ledger entry and
so the Access Auto bump is determined by
that initial create time flag and so I
think Auto bumps are optional but
they're not optional by The Entity
that's accessing the entry they're
optional based on the entity that's
creating the entry if that makes sense
and so I think that makes the most sense
now another thing for temporary entries
is because we now have this expiration
Ledger I know before we kind of went
back and forth as to you know if we
should have expert or temporary entries
with like firm  or exact
with like firm or exact
cut-offs or not or like that expire
on the exact Ledger entries and so I
think under this system
now that we don't use rent balances
that should be very possible and easy to
do such that you can now use temporary
entries for security features such that
if you want an entry that lasts exactly
100 ledgers what you would do is just
say  make a temporary entry set the
say make a temporary entry set the
expiration ledger to  you know or set
expiration ledger to you know or set
the TTL to 100 and then set auto bump to
false
now I think
we still need to  actually I still
we still need to actually I still
need to think about that a little bit
more  as to if we can because right
more as to if we can because right
now we are allowing both temporary and
restorable entries to be bumped by
anyone anytime and so I take back that
said they still might not be appropriate
for security uses out of the box
but so what I'm kind of envisioning
right now is the autobump flag and then
in addition to the automatic bumps on
access which both temporary and
restorable entries
have  you can also still manually
have you can also still manually
bump any entry both temporary and
restorable
via an operation and that operation
is similar to what was in rent balance
but now you just specify the new
expiration Ledger and then my thinking
is that whenever you bump or whenever
you pay for more  you can either
you pay for more you can either
there's two options here sorry
October were you saying something
no sorry
oh so I think  there's  whenever you
oh so I think there's whenever you
do a manual bump operation to extend the
expiration Ledger there are two ways we
could think about it first you could
either be credited for the amount you've
already paid and then view it as an
extension so for instance say
you know I have a ledger that's set
to expire in a year and I want to expire
it to expire in 18 months one potential
solution would be  the rent bump
solution would be the rent bump
operation only charges you at the
current market rate for six more months
of rent it says hey there's already you
know 12 months of rent here so we're
only going to charge you for the
additional six so the total comes out to
18 months that's option one now the
drawback to that option is again for
that first 12 months you're locking in a
lower rate
in that last six months is now at the
market rate so that's option one option
two is that whenever you do a manual
bump you don't count the previous
balance and the previous balance is
burned
what this would be is that if you
know there's an entry that you want to
live 18 months but it currently lives it
currently has an expiration that's only
12 months in the future you have to pay
18 months of rent at the current market
price and then the expiration Ledger is
reset and that in this way essentially
the 12 months that it was already there
is burned and you're charged for the
entire 18 months of the market rate
now the advantage to this
is again I think for a Network Health
perspective and to prevent capability we
want to be charging as close to Market
rates whenever we can and so in this
system you always can be charging  you
system you always can be charging you
know the market rate however it's kind
of a poor ux because you're burning this
amount
it seems that like in something like
this should be probably strictly
additive and so I guess as far as the
the two interfaces are concerned what
are your thoughts as two manual rent
bumps
that was a lot I just want to go back
to a point you made earlier quickly
about temporary entries so if I
understand correctly you are suggesting
that the temporary entries if we do go
for Ledger expert for  expiration
for Ledger expert for expiration
Ledger the the
the contract should be the same that
is we're kind of like letting go of the
whole
short medium long terms and  making it
short medium long terms and making it
the exact same interface as restorable
Ledger entries
yeah I think so now the one thing though
is I initially said they were fit for
security uses but then I caught myself
because right now any user can bump any
entry  which means that even if you
entry which means that even if you
have say like a kyc entry that's only
supposed to last 128 ledgers and you
initially set its  expiration alleged
initially set its expiration alleged
to be 128 ledgers in the future a
malicious user could bump that using the
manual operation and so I think for
security purposes
we still need to that still needs to
be enforced at the contract level
whereas like in this case the contract
would need to embed their own like TTL
inside the temporary entry
just because you have this arbitrary
bump I mean I guess we could
have a flag that's like no bump to
Temporary entries
but that might be adding too many
flags at this point  because the
flags at this point because the
current interfaces anyone can bump
anything
okay  thanks for answering that
okay thanks for answering that
question going back to Auto bumps for a
second I do think you know I've been
thinking about the the wallet and dap
experience
and what they need to think about in
terms of State expiration
and it does seem like autobump doesn't
negate the need for wallets and dapps to
actually be attentive to The Ledger
expiration times and to and to act on
that either
either by like suggesting the user to
do like a manual bump or to initiate a
manual bump so it it does seem like Auto
bump
has this like implicit Behavior to it in
which we're like extending Ledger
entry expression times but it doesn't
actually
it like adds complexity to the system
but it doesn't actually remove
complexity  from the implementation of
complexity from the implementation of
of like products it makes things a bit
less
expected and predictable
so I think
yeah go ahead well I think  the the
yeah go ahead well I think the the
auto bumps serve a very specific purpose
or at least they were initially designed
to serve a specific purpose and this is
the shared state so from your example
like  like a Dap or like a wallet
like like a Dap or like a wallet
right
this is  not a good example for
this is not a good example for
auto bumps because you have a particular
balance entry that you care about and no
one else really cares about and so for a
wallet perspective
say you want your wallet to live for
one year the correct answer is not just
to keep you balancing it with via Smart
contract so you Auto bump it or rather
just to do a manual operation and then
to bump that by a year the use case for
autobums is more for contract instances
and contract wasm particularly wasm is a
difficult one because you can have a
single wazzin blob that many different
contract instances use and the question
is who pays for that was and blob and so
essentially by having like this Auto
bump feature that every user who touches
it is required to pay a little bit
and you can essentially like share the
cost of you know this contract and this
contract instance or this contract code
in this contract instance among all the
users who are using it and so I think
the other bump feature was specifically
for these kind of shared resources
that there is no clear owner
for instance like usdc it'd be kind
of a crappy interface if you know 10 000
people used it a day but there was no
Auto bump and then the 10 000 in first
person had to go pay rent because it got
archived or something and he was just
the or they were just the The Unlucky
user that drawed the Short Straw and so
I think there definitely still is a
pretty strong use case for auto bumps
for these sort of different entry types
but I agree for something like a
adapter a wallet you would still need
you know this manual operation in
addition to audit bumps
oh
would you recommend a ledger entry that
is a user specific like a balance or an
LP position
to be Auto bumpable or not Auto bumpable
I mean
I think it just depends on the contract
implementation I don't think it needs to
be Auto bumpable the same way that
contract instances and stuff do
but I don't see like a downside I think
the general thinking is
the the kind of design model I had in
my head is that extending a lifetime
should never be negative
that like this is why it's not good
for security cases because anyone can
extend any lifetime such that it should
always be a positive action  it cannot
always be a positive action it cannot
be a negative action
and so I think
you know I think there was talks last
time of  exposing an Autobahn flag and
time of exposing an Autobahn flag and
I think this probably makes the most
sense that you know contract instances
and contract wise in code
you don't have this option whenever
you deploy it it has it must be Auto
bumped but then for any other key you
create I think you probably just give
the option too or or should we just
because there's also like I mean you
could also say that the contract
instances and contract code are Auto
bumped and nothing else is but then you
can kind of get into this sticky
situation where there are still contract
types that have shared States so for
instance if you can think like a  a
instance if you can think like a a
like a DEX right  and there's like
like a DEX right and there's like
this  asset pair that start as an
this asset pair that start as an
entry and many different people are like
viewing or trading that asset pair you
wouldn't want one individual to be stuck
with the bill and so I think that there
are still I still think Auto bump is a
powerful primitive and I think it should
probably be enabled by default just
because it's the safest route
but I think you know having  a
but I think you know having a
option to turn it off especially for
personal State like balances is probably
a good idea  and so now that I've
a good idea and so now that I've
talked for a little bit I think the
answer your question I would probably
say for something like a token balance I
would probably say no to the auto bump
Behavior just because it's something
that will probably like the lifetime of
which will be explicitly managed by a
wallet
because I I agree it's kind of needed
the one thing that maybe like  I'm
the one thing that maybe like I'm
thinking about there is that
so for the first version we can do you
know something like that right like I
would imagine that maybe
in the future we would want to have like
maybe something that
that kind of Auto Tunes over time
because like in the example of like the
you have like a very  you know active
you have like a very you know active
contract the wazam is basically going to
be used multiple times per Ledger
and you end up with really reaching your
limit  fairly quickly and then when
limit fairly quickly and then when
the limit is reach you actually are
backed into that situation where
you know some users are going to bump
some are not going to bump
like basically the first one in The
Ledger all right and the bumping
and then
yeah and that and also like the  if
yeah and that and also like the if
the what if the blob is is fairly large
maybe that auto bump on the ends up
adding quite a bit of cost to  each
adding quite a bit of cost to each
individual transaction
if it's you know bumping like for a good
number of Legends let's say you know 100
ledgers or something
to keep in mind
Garen there is a question about the
mechanics of Autobahn from Paul can you
expand a bit on when does Auto bump
actually occur
yeah so the current strategy is that
autobump occurs on all access which is
both read and write access
how this works under the hood is that
you know in addition to having the
expiration Ledger stored in The Ledger
entry we also have like this kind of
shell entry type
that is used for read-only Access so
for instance like for your wasin blob
they're only access read only and
essentially to modify a ledger entry in
The Bucket List you have to rewrite the
entire entry  at the top level bucket
entire entry at the top level bucket
and so if we were to modify the  you
and so if we were to modify the you
know the entry or the the expiration
Ledger directly in The Ledger entry
you'd have to rewrite the entire wasin
blob and So to avoid this we have like
this  kind of shim entry type which is
this kind of shim entry type which is
just an expiration Ledger extension and
so this entry is very small it's
literally just a key and then the new
expiration Ledger and so we use this
entry type
whenever we want to bump a read-only
entry and so in the wasm use case even
though you're only reading the wasm
because we are Auto bumping you do
have to do a small write but that right
is very small  it's the minimal size
is very small it's the minimal size
right you can do and so we are
implicitly turning every read into a
read write
but we're not rewriting the entire
entry we're reading the entire entry and
then writing a very small entry with the
new expiration Ledger and so under the
hood that's how we implement it
efficiently
rent bumps for both reads and writes
so
I do want to touch on something that you
mentioned before which is the question
of  with  should bumping
of with should bumping
like pumping in general should that
be a flag  it does feel like you know
be a flag it does feel like you know
last week we talked a bit about
you know very various Oracle usage
patterns and  you know we got to
patterns and you know we got to
inclusion where sometimes the contract
developer would want to limit or give an
upper boundary to when a ledger entry
should exist
and
making it non-bumpable is a very kind of
like easy way to do that
the question is like does that
over complex the system
well so I guess we have we have two
different questions here
I think we have the question of do we
want to
does the entry
Auto bump and then does the entry
allow bumps
and so I think from an implementation
standpoint these would be very easy to
implement
we could just you know thrown a Flags
field on The Ledger entry
and Define a couple of flags I think
the question is
is this  you know making the user
is this you know making the user
experience too complex
and so what this would look like is I
think
this would only be explicable to
Temporary entries I think
or Okay so let's talk about the
Autobahn flag first I think the Autobahn
flag
whether or not this item is auto
bumped on access it could be an optional
flag for both temporary and restorable
entries but I think it should be
strictly enforced for contract wasm and
contract instances now for the  should
contract instances now for the should
you allow bumps at all I think we could
allow that flag but that flag could only
be used for temporary entries
and so this would be the use case
where you either have like a security
use case
where you want this to do exactly
some number of ledgers or the Oracle use
case where the thing is only valid for
five minutes or whatever and then if you
set this flag then this entry would not
receive Auto bumps and it would also not
be bumpable by the manual operation and
if you tried to bump it it would just
fail or Panic or something like that now
you would only want this black on
temporary entries because restorable
entries and unique entries should always
be bumpable
they they don't necessarily need to
always have Auto bombs but they should
always be bumpable just because they are
important information that needs to be
saved which is why they are subject to
being sent to the state expiration node
when they expired and so just because
the design parameter for this entry
is that it's supposed to be important
live State
there should be no use cases where
you wouldn't want to bump or wouldn't
want to allow a unique or restorable
entry to be bumpable and so I think that
is the  the most technically complete
is the the most technically complete
kind of interface
it's very you know feasible from a
core perspective the only question is if
that's too much complexity at the end
user
foreign
I think that as you described this
If it creates more Divergence between
temporary entries and restorable entries
then
probably for the sake of Simplicity I
say we shouldn't include it especially
because this is something that the
contract developer can  program for in
contract developer can program for in
their contract
I will say if we if we go this route and
say if we I think so so if I'm
understanding it correctly we don't want
Divergence and so we'd have an autobump
flag
true false but we would not have the
no bump flag I think if we go this route
we need to be very clear in our
documentation that the expiration Ledger
is not absolute
because if you know have like a
temporary entry self-delink entry and
then there's a field called expiration
Ledger it's a reasonable assumption that
The Ledger would be deleted immediately
after that ledger and if we don't have
this no bump flag that's not the case
because a malicious user could you know
invoke the operation and bump any
temporary entry even if autobump is
disabled and so  you know I think
disabled and so you know I think
that's a fine interface decision to make
that all entries are bumpable but I
think we need to make that very clear
just from a ux perspective so that we
don't have security issues with
temporary entries being used improperly
any questions or comments on this
what do people think about
should we have the bump bumpable flag
I'm just going to type a big thing but I
could actually say it
I think I would vote for having
not having an Autobahn flag
if possible just having a fewer
configuration options for the different
types of storage like there's two
different types of storage and they act
differently I think that's fine to
explain and understand
but if you have to say okay there's
restorable entries and there's temporary
entries and they act in this way unless
you enable auto bump on them and then
restore volunteers like you know what I
mean there's like four different
configurations Now versus just two
so Paul are you talking about the
bumpable flag or the auto bumpable flag
sorry yes sorry pumpable okay
yeah I think that makes sense to me it's
just not  everything is bumped
just not everything is bumped
but just so I understand are we still
interested in the Autobahn flag or do
we also want to Nick say that and just
say everything I bumps as well
I definitely don't think that everything
should be Auto bumpable by default
yeah it does sound like for from a
completeness perspective having both of
these flags kind of like covers
most use cases
I mean one thing we can do is
just like if we don't want to expose the
bumpable flag now we can just Define it
in the xdr and defined in core just not
exposing the SDK
and then turn that on V2 if we want
to you know have a more complicated ux
Matrix for storage
that would at least give us future
proofing or like I think actually if we
just
if if we were defining Auto bump anyway
then we need to have a Flags field
for the album flag and so we can easily
extend it later
and so I think you know the bumpable
versus no bumpable that could be a V2
feature
but I think unless there's like a
strong strong one for it now we can just
leave that off for now and just have the
autobump flag
I'm not sure that the Autobahn really
benefit the network
it might benefit the ease of use but not
necessarily the network itself right
sure I guess the you are having more
more IO churn for sure
I guess the there didn't seem to be a
great solution for the contract instance
and contract was in the case without
Autobahn so I think you know it for it
might be useful to say maybe like
I think those two entries need something
like Auto bump or need some way of
essentially like  automatically or
essentially like automatically or
pooling rent together in some way
because that was kind of the  the the
because that was kind of the the the
thing we were trying to think about with
the contract wasm is okay you have like
four or five different instances that
all have the same was and back end how
do you equitably and equally share the
load when it comes to expiration ledgers
I I think that my my the direction that
I'm thinking about is that if someone
was uploading a contract
I want to see his hotels involvement in
the future on maintaining that
and not so much on leaving it and
assuming that it will be funded by
someone else
like I I want to see like a activity
right on that contract from the owner
and not by someone else that might be
inherently using it
oh fishes that contracts don't have an
owner like who doesn't can be reported
by anyone and you pay anyone
so you know if you have a the creditable
implementation that people are using
there is no clear owner yes someone
might have written in the code but
anyone can deploy it and
yeah it's kind of hard to track to
anyone and demand you know maintenance
from someone
I mean you could expect it but it's
like the Canada universally demand this
yeah I feel like there's kind of the the
concept of like a library contract is
definitely a big thing on ethereum and
so it feels like an unfair expectation
to write something like a like a Dap
implementation that has you know that's
that's more of a library function and
expect the library owner to be the sole
payer for that even though other
contract instances are using that
Wiseman making money off the wasm it
just seems weird that if five you know
different contract instances are using
and profiting of wasm that only the you
know entity that originally deployed the
wasm should be on the hook for paying
for it
so I would argue that if someone is
using something for free
then he shouldn't
instead you should either pay the author
right and generate money right out of
that right or basically copy it in from
now on he would be the owner of that
piece
what do you mean by copy though I feel
like that's why it works for Network
perspective because now you have like
five identical copies of the same ones
yeah the current design is exclusively
like encouraging sharing the code
because we don't want to store it
tens or hundreds of duplicate version
drops because it's the biggest lecture
entries  by far so you don't want to
entries by far so you don't want to
encourage code to paste and you know
fragment system or anything and
again wait
I think I I went around here but in dth
for all like a lot of the things I
implemented by proxy patterns and Stuff
Etc again a lot of instances are
referring to say another single contract
instance and
you know you do not deploy your own like
copy of unislove and you do not maintain
it instead of it you can just refer to a
proxied instance of unisol that is yes
getting updated by someone probably but
I don't think it's fair to say that a Do
Your Own Thing
yeah
I know I would be happy to see some
incentive model Incorporated here in is
part of that but you know maybe that's
something that we need to you know like
think separately of the
countries
do you have any thought about that
yeah I think we we should allow the we
should allow contracts to be detached
from a concept of an owner
you know for for a lot of legal reasons
this is better for some contracts you
know like the uni swap contracts are not
upgradable they don't have an owner
and and that's the way they want it like
it exists like that for a reason right
so I don't think we should we should
kind of like own over emphasize this
concept of an owner
that's a good argument
Aaron do you think it would be
reasonable to constrain Auto bump to
these entries which are the ones which
are going to benefit from the most so
not all ledger entry is not contract
data
but just the contract code and the
contract instances
yeah I think contract code contract
instances for sure
but I think there's also the reason
why I wanted to Define autobump is I
think there's also
areas where contract data should be Auto
bumped
so like for instance like if you have a
tax
and then there are like entries on
the Decks that many users of the Dex use
the Audubon feature is kind of just
so that these entries are kind of like
paid for by all users instead of you
know one unlucky user so I think
I think there's still there are
definitely use cases where you'd want
something like an autobump primitive for
contract data
however I could definitely see a use
case where this is not the default as a
flag where contract instances and
contract wasm  receive bumps
contract wasm receive bumps
by requirement and then data defaults
to false but you can turn it on if you
want
because I still think there are
definitely use cases where you'd want
something like this for contract data I
don't know if it's a common case but
there definitely are significant cases
I think it's a very common case like
effectively everything in a in a
contract that is like a global variable
or Global state that doesn't
specifically adhere to to an account
like you know like in a liquidity pool
the actual like pool values are global
and
need to be bumped
we have been discussing this for some
time  what about  explicitly change
time what about explicitly change
the data to the contract instance like
do we anticipate
some short case where you know the data
is kind of global but it's not once per
contract or something if not then maybe
we just for the small Global state of
the contract in the instant century and
then you know it's subject to the same
Ultra bomb obviously because if you
think about it it's kind of a part of
the contract
that's another consideration here I
mean I guess the question is how
monolithic do we want to be right
because the issue with that is that
the so say the advantage is that like
if you have like a
a contract instance that's like has a
very large amount Global state every
call must bump all that state whereas
like I said for instance where the
liquid equals so there's like a poor
implementation that has like  10
implementation that has like 10
different like asset swaps or something
and so even if you only access one you
have to bump the other nine implicitly
whereas
if you don't title and you keep
everything individual then you only have
to bump the entries you actually touch
now I don't know like in practice
contracts might be small enough that
this isn't really a big issue it
definitely does simplify some things and
decreases our right amplification as
well because you'd only need to write at
most one bump per contract instance
so this effectively goes
sorry go aheadly
I think it's difficult to distinguish
between Global and individual because
like they're definitely going to be
contracts that have like nexuses like
where it's not Global but maybe it
involves like multiple participants
so
I don't know like where do we draw the
line between
something should be a shared cost versus
being an individual cost
seems too difficult to do that
yeah other than like the really General
cases of contract code should definitely
be a shared cost
like in for contract data I don't think
we can make that call like I think the
country developers do
foreign
ly think the safest option is just to
default this to true
and then maybe expose a flag just
because I feel like the benefit or the
drawback to Auto bumping something where
when it shouldn't be Auto bumped is very
minimal because the whole idea is that
for the bump to be a small bump such
that if lots of users are accessing it
over time it grows but for instance
right if you have a balance
it you know and you say view balance
and you have to pay 10 extra ledgers of
rent on the one entry I mean that will
literally like that might be less than
like an Excel I'd be measured in strips
and so I feel like the the drawback to
not having autobombs can be high if you
have a shared you know  you know
have a shared you know you know
Global Entry that you forget to bump and
then for the entire lifetime of that
contract you have to manually bump it
it's expensive I feel like that's a much
worse failure case than the other case
where you sometimes have to pay a small
additional fee to access some entries
leaning into that is there is a really a
big downside to not requiring Auto bump
like what's not having the option not
making configurable oh yeah just like
requiring it like universally
yeah I personally think there's I think
there's not a I think there maybe is one
negative use case we have Oracle data
that should really only live for like
five minutes or ten minutes
it would be really annoying if you
know especially if this data is accessed
often in like a like a DEX sort of
environment I think that would be really
annoying if you access this thing so
much in a five minute lifetime such that
it always lives for like six hours or
like two weeks after
you know even though you should only
do five minutes so I think for like very
short-lived  entries and like Oracle
short-lived entries and like Oracle
data there's a strong use case
outside of that I don't see a super
strong use case
for for not just repairing oil pumps
everywhere
see
are you suggesting setting into true
for every type of Entry or just for
restorable entries because like for the
Oracle use case that you're describing
Garand wouldn't they use temporary
entries for that
yeah yes I think  so I think right now
yeah yes I think so I think right now
we are talking about a unified interface
where both restorable and temporary have
the same expiration Ledger interface and
both have the same Auto buttons
yeah I feel like contracts
put in contracts avoid the issue that
you're describing
you know where you accidentally
continue to rebump a temporary entry
by
I guess like moving on to using like a
contract that uses a temporary
for five minutes
I guess how would people be referencing
that like an hour from now
well no so that's the issue right so
it's that no one is referencing it now
and for now but in that five minutes
enough people referenced it such that it
was aren't bumped so much that it will
live significantly longer than five
minutes
so the issue is no one will access it
within an hour but it will live you know
an hour two hours or however long
so this I think what you're just I
guess so
what if Auto bumping wasn't
didn't bump it a fixed amount what if it
bumped up to some cap
I mean it does bump up to some cap
because we have
we have a  a maximum rent balance
we have a a maximum rent balance
for a maximum expiration Ledger due
to you know issues we discussed earlier
and so there is a cap it's just that the
issue is that
you know that cap will make sense for
some entries but doesn't make sense for
others so for instance like if the cap
is six months and in the extreme case
you have an oracle entry That was
supposed to last five minutes that lasts
up to the cap of six months that's a lot
of wasted fees
okay so it sort of feels
go ahead
sorry it's sort of so this is the last
thing I'm going to say I think on this
it sort of feels like
Auto bump okay we could argue that what
Obama should be configurable per entry
but it also sounds like the amount of
this thing should be Auto bumped before
if we're making a configurable
it's not really a binary yes or no it's
more like an amount
like as a contract developer
the contract developers really
probably like the person who's gonna
know best like how long if this is going
to get bumped it needs to be bumped for
or I guess it's some combination of the
contract developer and the user but
yeah just I'm a little skeptical of
allowing contracts to Define you know
like access fee amounts right because if
a contract was like oh you know like
even if it's not malicious it's just
like a stupid design it's like hey this
should have six months and it's like a
you know a thousand or it's like a you
know 10 kilobyte entry that you know
requires a six-month bomb just to access
that's a pretty poor ux
yeah I'm like this is just the slippery
slope of configurability like the more I
yeah in some ways maybe we need
you know to Paul's Point around like
the not making things configurable
maybe this is the trade-off we make we
make it okay like temporary entries
might get bumped more than what they
need to they might live around a little
bit longer but that's a trade-off for
for all these other reasons
okay so we're at time
it definitely sounds like
everyone's on board with Ledger
exploration  moving on from rent
exploration moving on from rent
balance
there are the questions of which
flags we expose
and there is the question that Dima
raised about revisit revisiting the the
idea of contract attached state
which we decided  against in the
which we decided against in the
context of metadata  but  that
context of metadata but that
wasn't
yeah it wasn't a landslide of
opinions there so maybe it's worth
rethinking about that so again  it
rethinking about that so again it
does sound like you have a lot to work
with right now in terms of Ledger
exploration
I would try to summarize this
question about which kind of Flags
We've we've just debated and and
starting a discussion around that  to
starting a discussion around that to
give people some asynchronous time to
think about that
and Dima if you could kind of like
resurface this idea of kind of like
contract attached state
and the the benefits of that
both in this context and in others I
think that could be beneficial
Garen is there anything else you
know that sounds good okay
Dima I saw you unmuted for a sec
there yeah I just want to just say that
yeah when I have some time oh right I
guess is that my nature with the
contract data you said through the time
yeah so I I don't know if you have
enough time to get it shipped into the
one even everyone is on board but yeah I
need to think a bit more about this
awesome
okay  thank you everyone  it's been
okay thank you everyone it's been
a great session see y'all next week